.. This file is part of the OpenDSA eTextbook project. See
.. http://algoviz.org/OpenDSA for more details.
.. Copyright (c) 2012-2013 by the OpenDSA Project Contributors, and
.. distributed under an MIT open source license.

.. avmetadata:: 
   :author: Cliff Shaffer
   :topic: Randomized Algorithms

.. odsalink:: DataStructures/SkipList.css
.. odsalink:: AV/SearchStruct/SkipListIntroCON.css
.. odsalink:: AV/SearchStruct/SkipListInsertCON.css
.. odsalink:: AV/SearchStruct/SkipListRmvCON.css

Skip Lists
==========

This section presents a probabilistic search structure called the
:term:`Skip List`.
Like the :term:`BST`, Skip Lists are designed to overcome a basic
limitation of array-based and linked lists:
Either search or update operations require linear
time.
The Skip List is an example of a
:term:`probabilistic data structure`, because it makes some of its
decisions at random.

Skip Lists provide an alternative to the BST and related tree
structures.
The primary problem with the BST is that it may easily become
unbalanced.
The :term:`2-3 Tree` is guaranteed to remain balanced regardless of
the order in which data values are inserted, but it is rather
complicated to implement.
The :term:`AVL tree` and the :term:`splay tree` are also guaranteed to
provide good performance, but at the cost of added complexity as
compared to the BST.
The Skip List is easier to implement than known balanced tree
structures.
The Skip List is not guaranteed to provide good performance
(where good performance is defined as
:math:`\Theta(\log n)` search, insertion, and deletion time), but it
will provide good performance with extremely high probability
(unlike the BST which has a good chance of performing poorly).
As such it represents a good compromise between difficulty of
implementation and performance.

.. inlineav:: SkipListIntroCON ss
   :output: show

We can continue adding pointers to selected nodes in this way --- give
a third pointer to every fourth node, give a fourth pointer to every
eighth node, and so on |---|  until we reach the
ultimate of :math:`\log n` pointers in the first and middle nodes for
a list of :math:`n` nodes.
To search, start with the bottom row of pointers, going as far as
possible and skipping many nodes at a time.
Then, shift up to shorter and shorter steps as required.
With this arrangement, the worst-case number of accesses is
:math:`\Theta(\log n)`.

We will store with each Skip List node an array
named ``forward`` that stores the pointers.
Position ``forward[0]`` stores a level 0 pointer,
``forward[1]`` stores a level 1 pointer, and so on.
The Skip List object includes data member ``level`` that
stores the highest level for any node currently in the Skip List.
The Skip List stores a header node named ``head`` with
``level`` pointers.
The ``find`` function is shown next along a visualization.

.. codeinclude:: Randomized/SkipList
   :tag: SkipFind

The ideal Skip List is organized so that (if the first and last nodes
are not counted) half of the nodes have only one pointer, one quarter
have two, one eighth have three, and so on.
The distances are equally spaced; in effect this is a
"perfectly balanced" Skip List.
Maintaining such balance would be expensive during the normal process
of insertions and deletions.
The key to Skip Lists is that we do not worry about any of this.
Whenever inserting a node, we assign it a level
(i.e., some number of pointers).
The assignment is random, using a geometric distribution yielding
a 50% probability that the node will have one pointer, a 25%
probability that it will have two, and so on.
The following function determines the level based on such a
distribution:

.. codeinclude:: Randomized/SkipList
   :tag: SkipRand

Once the proper level for the node has been determined, the next
step is to find where the node should be inserted and link it in as
appropriate at all of its levels.
Here is an implementation for inserting a new
value into the Skip List.
Note that we build an ``update`` array as we progress through the Skip
List, so that we can update the pointers for the nodes that will
preceed the one being inserted.

.. codeinclude:: Randomized/SkipList
   :tag: SkipInsert

.. inlineav:: SkipListInsertCON ss
   :output: show

The ``remove`` function is similar to insertion in that the ``update``
array is built as part of searching for the record to be deleted.
Then those nodes specified by the update array have their forward
pointers adjusted to point around the node being deleted.

.. inlineav:: SkipListRmvCON ss
   :output: show

A newly inserted node could have a high level generated by
``randomLevel``, or a low level.
It is possible that many nodes in the Skip List could have many
pointers, leading to unnecessary insert cost and yielding poor
(i.e., :math:`\Theta(n)` performance during search, because not many
nodes will be skipped.
Conversely, too many nodes could have a low level.
In the worst case, all nodes could be at level 0, equivalent to a
regular linked list.
If so, search will again require :math:`\Theta(n)` time.
However, the probability that performance will be poor is quite low.
There is only one chance in 1024 that ten nodes in a row will be at
level 0.
The motto of probabilistic data structures such as the Skip List is
"Don't worry, be happy".
We simply accept the results of ``randomLevel`` and expect that
probability will eventually work in our favor.
The advantage of this approach is that the algorithms are simple,
while requiring only :math:`\Theta(\log n)` time for all operations in
the average case.

In practice, the Skip List will probably have better
performance than a BST.
The BST can have bad performance caused by the order in which data are
inserted.
For example, if :math:`n` nodes are inserted into a BST in ascending
order of their key values, then the BST will look like a linked list
with the deepest node at depth :math:`n-1`.
If the data inserted over the life of the BST could be randomly
ordered, then the probability distribution for the cost of the insert
and search operations would be similar to that of the Skip List.
The problem for the BST is that this randomization does not happen in
fact, but rather the BST is constrained by the actual order of inputs
and searches.

In contrast, the Skip List's performance does not depend on the order
in which values are inserted into the list.
In a sense, the data are "randomization" automatically as part of the
Skip List probabilistic behavior as the depths of the nodes are being
selected.
As the number of nodes in the Skip List increases, the probability of
encountering the worst case decreases geometrically.
Thus, the Skip List illustrates a tension between the theoretical
worst case (in this case, :math:`\Theta(n)` for a Skip List
operation), and a rapidly increasing probability of average-case
performance of :math:`\Theta(\log n)`, that characterizes
probabilistic data structures.

.. odsascript:: DataStructures/SkipList.js
.. odsascript:: AV/SearchStruct/SkipListIntroCON.js
.. odsascript:: AV/SearchStruct/SkipListInsertCON.js
.. odsascript:: AV/SearchStruct/SkipListRmvCON.js
