.. This file is part of the OpenDSA eTextbook project. See
.. http://opendsa.org for more details.
.. Copyright (c) 2012-2020 by the OpenDSA Project Contributors, and
.. distributed under an MIT open source license.

.. avmetadata::
   :author: Cliff Shaffer

=========
Project 2
=========

Project 2 Description
---------------------

.. revealjs-slide::

* Geographic Information System (GIS)
  
  * City records

    * Name (a string)
    * Location (X and Y)

  * Implement with two indices:

    * BST for strings (allows duplicates)
    * kd tree for 2D coordinates (no duplicates are allowed)

      * Region search (by seach circle) is efficient


Project 2 Design
----------------

.. revealjs-slide::

* You can find a lot of helpful starter code at OpenDSA.

  * The BST code is a good start, but it will need some modifications.

    * Be careful on deletion: Need to delete the correct record, not
      just any record that matches the name.

  * Module 15.5 on kd trees has rough code to get you started.

* Generalization: The BST should handle any key type that is
  comparable, and any record type.

  * Assume that the record type is comparable. (Using KV Pairs would be
    more general purpose, but it is OK not to do that if you don't
    want to.)

* We do not require any generalization for the kd tree (though you are
  free to build in some amount of encapsulation if you like). We won't
  penalize if the kd tree is written for City records explicitly.
  

Spatial Data Structures
-----------------------

.. revealjs-slide::

* BST can take any comparable type, but is a one-dimensional key.

  * XY coords are 2-dimensional. Could combine? Would help for exact
    match, but not ranges (find in a search circle).
  * Could use two BSTs? Of narrow search on X? (would find everything
    in a vertical band, each would have to be checked for distance)

* kd-tree is one of several Spatial Data Structures for point data.

  * It is not particularly better or worse than the others, its just
    what we picked this semester.


K-D Tree
--------

.. revealjs-slide::

.. avembed:: AV/Spatial/kd-treeAV.html ss
   :keyword: Spatial Data Structures, KD Tree


