.. _Configuration:

===============================================
Compiling Book Instances: OpenDSA Configuration
===============================================

--------
Overview
--------

A given OpenDSA eTextbook is called a "book instance".
The contents of a book instance is defined by a configuration file,
the detailed syntax for which is defined in this section.
In practice, it is easiest to start by copying an existing
configuration file, and then changing it to fit your needs.
Configuration files are JSON files, normally stored in OpenDSA/config.
From the top level of an OpenDSA repository (from within the |devstack_link|), you can compile a book
instance (given the existance of a configuration file named
``config/foo.json``) by issuing this command:

``python tools/configure.py config/foo.json --no-lms``

.. |devstack_link| raw:: html

   <a href="https://github.com/OpenDSA/OpenDSA-DevStack#development-workflow" target="_blank">OpenDSA-DevStack</a>


Separate from book instances is the concept of a "course instance" or "course offering".
Depending on the course software (typically an LMS such as Canvas) that you are using, you will likely need to compile a special
instance of a given OpenDSA book instance for each course that intends
to use it.

Details about how to define a course related information and how to
create a course offering using OpenDSA web interfaces is in
:ref:`OpenDSA web interfaces <OpenDSA_LTI_Web_Interfaces>`.

---------------------------------------
Motivation for the Configuration System
---------------------------------------

* Allows content to be environment-independent

  * Configuration file contains all environment-dependent settings
    such as paths and target URLs
  * Example: If developers want to point their front-end code at
    different backend systems, they simply make the change in their
    own config file.  They can share all OpenDSA content, but when
    they build the book, it will be built using their personalized
    settings

* Allows easy replication

  * Collects all settings and preferences required to configure an
    instance of OpenDSA in a single, portable file that can be easily
    shared among instructors.
  * Once a configuration has been created, instructors can make
    identical copies without going through the configuration process

* Allows fine grain control

  * Existing configuration files provide sensible defaults, but allow
    instructors to control aspects such as how many points a specific
    exercise is worth or whether it is required for module proficiency

* Configuration files will eventually be generated by a GUI front-end,
  but for now we create them by hand (tedious, and the motivation for
  a GUI tool is rapidly moving to the front burner).


---------------------
Configuration Process
---------------------

A comment at the beginning of configure.py gives some information
information about how the script works.
Generally, those who want to compile a book instance do not need to
worry about those details.

**Note**: The OpenDSA root directory must be web-accessible as there
are many supplemental directories and files (AV/, Exercises/, lib/,
SourceCode/, etc) which must be referenced.  These files are identical
for all books and not copying them reduces the footprint of each
book.


Module and Exercise Removal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Only the modules listed in the configuration file will be included.
  To remove a module from the book, simply remove the module object
  from the configuration file.

* To remove a section from a module, set the "showsection" attribute to
  ``false``.
  Exercises are normally the sole contents of some sections.
  Note that Exercises that do not appear in the configuration file will
  still be included in the book using the default configuration
  options.


Book Name
~~~~~~~~~

The name of the configuration file will often be used in some way by the
LMS that manages the course.
For example, the name of the configuration file might be the Course Code
in Canvas LMS.

---------------
Future Features
---------------

* GUI editor/interface for editing configuration files.

------
Format
------

OpenDSA configuration files are stored using JSON.
Here are the field definitions.
All are required unless otherwise specified.

* **title** - The title of the OpenDSA textbook.

* **build_dir** - (optional) The directory where the configured book
  directory will be created, defaults to 'Books' if omitted

  * A new directory, named after the configuration file, will be
    created at this location and serve as the output directory for the
    configuration process.  Files required to compile the book will be
    copied / written to the output directory, including modified
    version of the source RST files

    * Example: Assume "build_dir": "Books" and the name of the
      configuration file used is "CS3114.json", the output directory
      would be "~OpenDSA/Books/CS3114/"

  * The compiled textbook will appear in ``[build_dir]/[book name]/html``
  * This directory must be web accessible

* **code_dir** (optional) - Specifies a directory that contains
  another directory as specified by ``code_lang`` (see below).
  Defaults to ``SourceCode`` if omitted.

  * Ex: Using ``"code_dir": "SourceCode/"``, and assuming that the
    defined language directory is ``Python`` then the configuration
    process would look for example Python source code in
    ``~OpenDSA/SourceCode/Python``.

* **code_lang** - A dictionary where each key is the name of a
  programming language (supported by Pygments and matching a directory
  name in ``code_dir``), and each value is a dictionary of language
  options.
  Language options are:

  * ``ext`` for a list of file extensions.
  * ``label`` for the text that will be displayed at the
    header of the code snippet tab.
  * ``lang`` for the name of the programming language (supported by
    Pygments).

  The order in which the languages and extensions are provided
  determines their order of precedence in cases where only one display
  code is to be selected.

  * Example::

     "code_lang": {
        "C++": {"ext": ["cpp","h"],"label":"C++","lang":"C++"}
        "Java": {"ext":["java"], "label":"Java", "lang":"java"},
        "Processing": {"ext":["pde"], "label":"Processing","lang":"java"}
     }

  * In this example, assuming that ``code_dir`` is ``SourceCode/``,
    the system would search for ``.cpp`` files,
    followed by ``.h`` files in ``~OpenDSA/SourceCode/C++/``,
    then ``.java`` files in ``~OpenDSA/SourceCode/Java/``,
    and finally ``.pde`` files in ``~OpenDSA/SourceCode/Processing/``.

  * There is not actually a need for the "code" language files to be a
    real programming language. For example, it is plausible to use a
    "programming language" called ``Pseudo`` with file suffix ``.txt``.
    However, Pygments might not do well with colorizing the result.

* **tabbed_codeinc** (optional) - A boolean that controls whether or
  not code is displayed in a tabbed interface.
  If true, it will display the specified code in each of the languages
  specified in ``code_lang`` (if the code exists) in a tabbed
  container.
  If false, it will display the code in a single language (the first
  language for which the code exists with the order of precedence
  determined by the order specified in ``code_lang``).
  Defaults to ``true`` if omitted.

* **lang** (optional) - Specifies the native language of the book
  using the official ISO 639-1 or 639-2 standard abbreviation,
  defaults to ``en`` if omitted.
  This is used to control where RST source files are located, within
  ``~OpenDSA/RST/[lang]``.
  Any RST files not found in the indicated subdirectory will then be
  located in ``~OpenDSA/RST/en``.

* **glob_mod_options** - (optional) An object containing options to be
  applied to every module in the book.
  Can be overridden by module-specific options.

* **glob_exer_options** - (optional) An object containing options to
  be applied to every exercise in the book. Can be used to control the
  behavior of the exercise. Can be overridden by exercise-specific
  options.

* **glob_pe_options** - (optional) An object containing default options 
  for proficiency style exercises in the book. These options can be overidden
  for specific exercises. If this object is omitted, defaults defined 
  by the compilation script will be used. Fields for this object include:
    
    * **points** - The number of points khan-academy style exercises 
      are worth. Defaults to ``1`` if omitted.
    * **threshold** - A number between 0 and 1 specifing the percentage of 
      steps a user must get correct to achieve proficiency. 
      Defaults to ``1`` if omitted.
    * **required** - Whether proficiency exercises are required for module
      proficiency. Defaults to ``true`` if omitted.

    Example::

      "glob_pe_options": {
        "threshold": 1, 
        "points": 2.0, 
        "required": true
      }

* **glob_ka_options** - (optional) An object containing default options 
  for khan-academy style exercises in the book. These options can be overidden 
  for specific exercises. If this object is omitted, defaults defined 
  by the compilation script will be used. Fields for this object include:
    
    * **points** - The number of points khan-academy style exercises are worth. 
      Defaults to ``1`` if omitted.
    * **threshold** - The number of questions a user must complete to achieve
      proficiency. Defaults to ``5`` if omitted.
    * **required** - Whether khan-academy style exercises are required for module
      proficiency. Defaults to ``true`` if omitted.

    Example::

      "glob_ka_options": {
        "threshold": 5, 
        "points": 1.0, 
        "required": true
      }

* **glob_ss_options** - (optional) An object containing default options 
  for slideshows in the book. These options can be overidden for specific 
  slideshows. If this object is omitted, defaults defined by the compilation
  script will be used. Fields for this object include:
    
    * **points** - the number of points slideshows are worth. Defaults to
      ``0`` if omitted.
    * **threshold** - This option is not used for slideshows.
    * **required** - whether slideshows are required for module completion. 
      Defaults to ``false`` if omitted.

    Example::

      "glob_ss_options": {
        "threshold": 1.0, 
        "points": 0.0, 
        "required": false
      }

* **glob_extr_options** - (optional) An object containing default options 
  for external tool exercises (i.e. CodeWorkout) in the book. These options 
  can be overidden for specific exercises. If this object is omitted, 
  defaults defined by the compilation script will be used. Fields for this 
  object include:
    
    * **points** - the number of points external tool exercises are worth. 
      Defaults to  ``1`` if omitted. 
    * You may also specify default options for a specific external tool.
      Example::

        "glob_extr_options": {
          "code-workout": {
            "points": 2.0
          }, 
          "points": 1.0
        }
      
      In the above example, code-workout exercises are worth two points each,
      and all other external tool exercises are worth one point each. 
      Currently code-workout is the only external tool used by OpenDSA.

* **build_JSAV** - (optional) A boolean controlling whether or not the
  JSAV library should be rebuilt whenever the book is compiled.
  Defaults to ``false`` if omitted.

  * This value should normally set to ``false`` for development.
  * Instructors may wish to set this to true for production
    environments when configuration is run infrequently and JSAV is
    likely to have changed since the last time configuration occurred.

* **build_cmap** - (optional) A boolean controlling wether or not the
  glossary terms concept map should be diplayed.
  Defaults to ``false``.

* **req_full_ss** - (optional) A boolean controlling whether students
  must view every step of a slideshow in order to obtain credit.
  Defaults to ``true`` if omitted.

* **narration_enabled** - (optional) A boolean controlling whether text-to-speech
  narration of JSAV slideshows is enabled. Defaults to ``false`` if omitted.

* **start_chap_num** - (optional) Specifies at which number to start
  numbering chapters.
  Defaults to 0 if omitted.

* **suppress_todo** - (optional) A boolean controlling whether or not
  TODO directives are removed from the RST source files.
  Defaults to ``false`` if omitted.

* **tag** - (optional) A string containing a semi-colon delimited
  list of tags.
  This directs Sphinx to include material from RST ``only`` directives
  with the matching tag(s).
  This is useful for relatively fine-grain control over whether
  material will be included in a book instance.
  For example, if you want to have multiple paragraphs each with a
  programming language-dependent discussion, with only the appropriate
  paragraph for the language being used for this book instance
  actually appearing to the reader.
  Any material within an ``only`` block that does **not**
  have a matching ``tag`` in the config file will be left out.

* **assumes** - (optional) A string containing a semi-colon delimited
  list of topics that the book assumes students are familiar with.
  This allows for control over warnings about missing prerequisite
  modules during the build process.

* **chapters** - A hierarchy of chapters, modules, sections, and exercises.
  This makes up the vast majority of most configuration files.

  * Each key in "chapters" represents a chapter name.
    A module object is one whose key matches the name of an
    RST file in the ``~OpenDSA/RST/[lang]/`` directory.

  * **hidden** - This is an optional field to signal the preprocessor
    to not display the content of the chapter in the TOC. The
    configuration script will add the new directive
    ``odsatoctree``.
    The flagged chapter entries in the TOC will be
    of class ``hide-from-toc``, and will be removed by a CSS rule in
    odsaMOD.css file.

  * **Modules**

    * The key relating to each module object must correspond to a
      path to an RST file found in ~OpenDSA/RST/[lang]/.

    * **dispModComp** - (optional) A flag that, if set to "true", will
      force the "Module Complete" message to appear even if the module
      contains no required exercises.
      If set to "false", the "Module Complete" message will not appear,
      even if the module DOES contain required exercises.

    * **mod_options** - (optional) overrides ``glob_mod_options``,
      which allows modules to be configured independently from one
      another.
      Options that should be stored in ``JSAV_OPTIONS`` should be
      prepended with ``JOP-`` and options that should be stored in
      ``JSAV_EXERCISE_OPTIONS`` should be prepended with ``JXOP-``.
      (This can be used to override the defaults set in
      ``odsaUtils.js``).
      All other options will be made directly available to modules in
      the form of a parameters object created automatically by the
      client-side framework (specifically, when ``parseURLParams()`` is
      called in ``odsaUtils.js``).

    * **codeinclude** - (optional) An object that maps the path from a
      codeinclude to a specific language that should be used for that
      code.
      This allows control of individual code snippets, overriding the
      ``code_lang`` field.

      * Ex: ``"codeinclude": {"Sorting/Mergesort": "C++"}`` would set
        C++ as the language for the codeinclude "Sorting/Mergesort"
        within the current module.

    * **sections and exercises** - (optional) A collection of 
      section and exercise objects that define the sections and/or exercises 
      in the module whose settings you want to be different from 
      the default or global settings. 
      If you do not wish to override the default/global settings for a 
      section or exercise, you do not need to list it.

      * The section objects should have keys that match the
        titles of the corresponding sections in the RST file.
      * The exercise objects should have keys that match the short names
        of the corresponding exercises in the RST file.
      * To remove the section completely, provide the field
        ``showsection`` and set it to ``false``.
      * All options provided within a section object
        are appended to the directive, please
        see the :ref:`Extensions <ODSAExtensions>` section for a list
        of supported arguments.
      * A section in an RST file may contain multiple exercises objects 
        only one of which is gradable (has points greater than 0). 
        Each exercise object may contain the following attributes:

        * **points** - (optional) The number of points the exercise is
          worth. 
          Uses global defaults if omitted.
        * **required** - (optional) Whether the exercise is required
          for module proficiency.
          Uses global defaults if omitted.
        * **threshold** - (optional) The percentage that a user needs
          to score on the exercise to obtain proficiency.
          For khan-academy style exercises, this is the number of questions
          the user must get correct to obtain proficiency.
          Uses global defaults if omitted.

        * **exer_options** - (optional) An object containing
          exercise-specific configuration options for JSAV.
          Can be used to override the options set using
          ``glob_exer_options``.
          Options that should be stored in ``JSAV_OPTIONS`` should be
          prepended with ``JOP-`` and options that should be stored in
          ``JSAV_EXERCISE_OPTIONS`` should be prepended with
          ``JXOP-``.
          (This allows overriding the defaults set in
          ``odsaUtils.js``.)
          All other options will be made directly available to
          exercises in the form of a parameters object created
          automatically by the client-side framework (specifically
          when ``parseURLParams()`` is called in ``odsaUtils.js``).

      Example of a module object::

        "Background/IntroDSA": {
          "IntroSumm": {
            "threshold": 6
          },
          "Some Software Engineering Topics": {
            "showsection": false
          }
        }

      In the above example, the threshold for "IntroSumm"
      (a khan-academy style exercise) is set to ``6``, overriding
      whatever is specified in ``glob_ka_options``. It will retain the
      default settings for ``points`` and ``required`` that are specified in
      ``glob_ka_options``.
      The section titled "Some Software Engineering Topics" is set 
      to be removed when compiling the book.

      Example of a module object whose sections and exercises all use the 
      default/global settings::

        "Background/IntroDSA": {}

---------------------
Configuring Exercises
---------------------

The most important concern when configuring proficiency exercises is
the scoring option to be used.
JSAV-based proficiency exercises have a number of possible grading
methods:

* ``atend``: Scores are only shown at the end of the exercise.
* ``continuous:undo``: Mistakes are undone, the student will lose that
  point but have to repeat the step.
* ``continuous:fix``: On a mistake, the step is corrected, the student
  loses that point, and then is ready to attempt the next step. This
  mode requires that the exercise have the capability to fix the
  step.
  If it does not, this grading mode will default to
  ``continuous:undo``.

All proficiency exercises can be controlled through URL
parameters.
What the configuration file actualy does by setting
``exer_options`` is specify what should be in the URL parameters
that are sent to the exercise by the OpenDSA module page.
Here is an example for configuring an exercise::

          "shellsortPRO": {
            "required": true,
            "points": 2.0,
            "threshold": 0.9,
            "exer_options": {
              "JXOP-feedback": "continuous",
              "JXOP-fixmode": "fix"
            }
          },

This configuration will affect the configuration of an entity called
``shellsortPRO`` (presumeably defined by an ``..avembed`` directive in
the corresponding OpenDSA module).
It is scored (as indicated by setting the ``required`` field to ``true``),
and is worth 2.0 points of credit once the user reaches "proficiency".
To reach "proficiency" requires correctly achieving 90% of the
possible steps on some attempt at the exercise (as defined by
``threshold``).
The exercise is instructed to use the ``continuous:fix`` mode of
scoring.

In addition to the standard ``JXOP-feedback`` and ``JXOP-fixmode``
parameters, a given AV or exercise might have ad hoc parameter
settings that it can accept via URL parameter.
Examples might be algorithm variations or initial data input values.
Those would have to be defined by the exercise itself.
These (along with the standard grading options) can also have defaults
defined in the ``.json`` file associated with the AV or exercise,
which might help to document the available options.
Any such ad hoc parameter defaults can be over-ridden in the
``exer_options`` setting in the configuration file.

-------------------------
Creating Course Offerings
-------------------------
.. _CreateCourseOfferings:

Rationale
~~~~~~~~~

Separate from book configuration files (which define the contents of a
book, scoring information, and configurations for various exercise),
a given book instance will typically be accessed in the context of a
particular LMS, which will require various permissions in order to
operate correctly.
The compilation process separates the compilation of book files from
the interactions needed to set up the book's use at a specific
instance of the LMS.
Book instances are in fact compiled to the specification necessary for
that specific LMS to access it, meaning that book instances cannot be
shared across LMS's, or by different instances of the same LMS (say,
two instances of Canvas), or even by two course instances on the same
installation of a given LMS.
The reason is that the internal cross links between the various parts
of the book instance are often defined in the context of a specific
course instance within the LMS.

A specific course instance on a specific LMS installation is defined
by a course configuration file.
By convention, the file name will end with ``_LMSconf.json``.
A template for course configuration can be found
`here <https://github.com/OpenDSA/OpenDSA/blob/LTI/config/template_LMSconf.json>`_.

Since course configuration files routinely store sensitive information
such as account passwords and access keys, they are not stored in the
OpenDSA repository.
This documentation along with the template file should provide enough
information for you to successfully define the contents of a
configuration file.

A set of ``make`` targets are available in the OpenDSA Makefile.
From the top level of an OpenDSA repository, you can
compile the HTML files for a book instance by typing

``make <courseinstance>``

So, if there existed a book with a configuration file named
``config/foo.json``, you would type

``make foo``

This much (locally creating the HTML files) uses just the book
configuration file.

If you want to bind a book instance to a particular course instance on
a given LMS, that requires both compiling the book and pushing
information about it to the LMS.
Pushing information to the LMS is where the course configuration file
comes into play.
**After** you set up the proper course configuration file in
``config/foo_LMSconf.json``,  you can type:

``make foo opts="-c True"``

to push the necessary book data to your LMS.
Alternatively, there may already be a Makefile target named ``fooLMS``
that has this same effect by typing

``make fooLMS``


Format
~~~~~~

To understand the following description of configuration file data
fields, it helps to understand that running a "course" using
OpenDSA requires communication between several entities, including:

* An LTI tool provider.
  This is the site that hosts the book, which is probably where the book
  is being compiled.
* An LMS. The LMS has to grant access to the LTI provider in order for
  it to send scores and define the modules.
* The OpenDSA scoring, logging, and programming exercise server(s).
  Communications with these are required in order to handle crucial
  aspects of exercise scoring.

Here are the fields in the configuration file.

* **title** - The title for the course intance.
* **odsa_username** - A viable user account on the course instance
  (OpenDSA) scoring server.
* **odsa_password** - The corresponding password on the course instance
  (OpenDSA) scoring server.
* **target_LMS** - LMS name. We currently support 'canvas'.
  Other LMSs like moodle and Desire2Learn will be supported in the future.
* **LMS_url** - The URL for the LMS.
* **course_code** - The name used at the LMS to identify the
  course. In Canvas, this is the identfier given when creating the course.
* **access_token** - This is normally issued by the LMS to allow an
  LTI tool provider to communicate with it.
  In Canvas, go to your account-level settings.
  Near the bottom of the page you should see a big blue button that
  reads "New Access Token". Click this, then copy the string that is
  generated, and paste it into this field in the configuration file.
  If you (the creator of the config file and the one who compiles the
  book) are not the course instructor (with access to the LMS), then
  the course instructor will need to provide this access token.
* **LTI_consumer_key** - The key required by the LTI tool provider.
* **LTI_secret** - Effectively the password for the LTI tool
  provider.
* **module_origin** - The protocol and domain where the module files are hosted

  * Used by embedded exercises as the target of HTML5 post messages
    which send information to the parent (module) page
  * Ex: "module_origin": "http://algoviz.org",

* **exercise_server** - The protocol and domain (and port
  number, if different than the protocol default) of the exercise
  server that provides verification for the programming exercises.
  Defaults to an empty string (exercise server disabled) if omitted.

  * Trailing '/' is optional
  * Ex: "exercise_server": "https://opendsa.cs.vt.edu/",

* **logging_server** - The protocol and domain (and port
  number, if different than the protocol default) of the logging
  server that supports interaction data collection.
  Defaults to an empty string (logging server disabled) if omitted.

  * Trailing '/' is optional
  * Ex: "logging_server": "https://opendsa.cs.vt.edu/",

* **score_server** - The protocol and domain (and port
  number, if different than the protocol default) of the score server
  that supports centralized user score collection.
  Defaults to an empty string (score server disabled) if omitted.

  * Trailing '/' is optional
  * Ex: "score_server": "https://opendsa.cs.vt.edu/",
