.. This file is part of the OpenDSA eTextbook project. See
.. http://opendsa.org for more details.
.. Copyright (c) 2012-2020 by the OpenDSA Project Contributors, and
.. distributed under an MIT open source license.

.. avmetadata::
   :title: Turing Machines: Advanced Topics
   :author: Mostafa Mohammed; Cliff Shaffer
   :institution: Virginia Tech
   :requires: Turing Machines
   :satisfies: Advanced Turing Machines
   :topic: Turing Machines
   :keyword: Turing Machine
   :naturallanguage: en
   :programminglanguage: N/A
   :description: Presents more advanced topics related to Turing machines such as the composition of machines and the computational equivalence of Turing machine extensisons.

Turing Machines: Advanced Topics
================================

Making More Complicated Machines
--------------------------------

Obviously, Turing Machines can take an input and modify it.
We will see examples of how this leads to powerful computational
capability, even if it does not seem yet like they are so powerful.
To get a quick idea of their power, consider the following relatively
simple machine to accept :math:`L(a^nb^nc^n)`.
This is significant, because this language is in fact not context
free.
Which means that this simple Turing Machine is doing something that no
DFA, NFA, or PDA can do!

.. inlineav:: TManbncnCON ss
   :links: DataStructures/FLA/FLA.css AV/VisFormalLang/TM/TManbncnCON.css
   :scripts: lib/underscore.js DataStructures/FLA/FA.js DataStructures/FLA/TuringMachine.js AV/Development/formal_language/TuringMachine.js AV/VisFormalLang/TM/TManbncnCON.js
   :align: center
   :output: show
   :keyword: Turing Machines

|

.. inlineav:: TMComplicated3FS ff
   :links: DataStructures/FLA/FLA.css AV/PIFLA/TM/TMComplicated3FS.css
   :scripts:  lib/underscore.js DataStructures/FLA/FA.js DataStructures/FLA/TuringMachine.js DataStructures/PIFrames.js AV/PIFLA/TM/TMComplicated3FS.js
   :output: show
   :keyword: Turing Machines

|

.. inlineav:: TMcopy ss
   :links: DataStructures/FLA/FLA.css AV/Kochan/TMcopy.css
   :scripts: AV/Juwon/FAcopy.js AV/Kochan/TMcopy.js 
   :output: show
   :keyword: Turing Machines


Unrestricted and Context Sensitive Grammars
-------------------------------------------

Turing machines clearly can accept more languages than can PDAs, and
therefore more than the Context Free Languages.
Is there a class of grammars to match?
Or at least, one or more classes of more powerful classes of grammars?
Here we will briefly introduce two such classes of grammars.

**Unrestricted Grammars** allow productions :math:`u \rightarrow v`
where :math:`u` is in :math:`(V \cup T)^+` and
:math:`v` is in :math:`(V \cup T)^*`.
In other words, an unrestricted grammar allows any combination of
variables and terminals on both the left- and right-hand sides.
The single restriction is that :math:`\lambda` may not be the LHS
of a rule.
(So the term "unrestricted" is not literally true, but close!)

**Context Sensitive Grammars** are slightly more restrictive.
A grammar is a CSG if all productions are of the form
:math:`u \rightarrow v` where
:math:`u, v \in (V \cup T)^+` and :math:`|u| \leq |v|`.
Thus, a CSG cannot contract the number of things in
any sentential form created during a derivation.
In other words, while something created during a derivation can change
its form (even a terminal can be changed), that work cannot disappear
completely.
   
To illustrate their power, consider the following CSG.

.. math::

   S &\rightarrow&\ abc \mid aAbc\\
   Ab &\rightarrow&\ bA\\
   Ac &\rightarrow&\ Bbcc\\
   bB &\rightarrow&\ Bb\\
   aB &\rightarrow&\ aa \mid aaA

This grammar generates the language
:math:`L = \{ a^nb^nc^n : n \geq 1\}`.
This is probably not an easy thing to recognize, nor an easy thing to
come up with this grammar in the first place.
CSG are quite hard to use.
But try creating a derivation of a string for yourself.
You should discover that the variables A and B are being used to
control generation of the terminals a, b, and c to make sure that they
stay balanced.

While there are some subtle distinctions between the power of CSGs and
Unrestricted Grammars,
we will simply say that the set of languages
that can be generated by some Unrestricted Grammar
is the same as the set of languages
that can be recognized by some Turing machine.
In contrast, the set of languages
that can be generated by some CSG
is the same as the set of languages
that can be recognized by some Turing machine with certain
restrictions on the amount of memory that it is permitted to use.


Simple Arithmetic... and Beyond
-------------------------------

Previously we mentioned that a useful approach to representing numbers
in a Turing machine is to use unary notation.
In other words, the value :math:`n` is represented by :math:`n` marks
(we will use the symbol 1).
We showed a simple machine that implemented the increment function:
Beginning at the start of the input number, move to the right until
the first space is found and change that to '1'.

Now that we have seen implementations for copy and shift machines, we
can easily see how to implement some simple mathematical functions.
Adding two numbers represented in unary notation simply requires
moving over the first number until the '1' after the first space is
found, and then shifting the next number to the right (to make it be
part of the first number).
This should give you a sense of why we prefer unary notation to binary
or some other base.
Imagine implementing binary number addition using a Turing machine!
It is certainly possible, but would be a bit tedious to work out.
Of course, the original computer developers had to do something
similar.

Multiplication is slightly more complicated.
Again, this would be represented by two blocks of 1's.
To do multiplication, we would first make a copy of the second operand
to its right.
We would then erase the first mark of the first operand.
We would then repeat extending the length of our output by the length
of the second operand.
We would then reduce the length of the first operand by one.
We would then repeat this process until the first operand has been
erased.
We would then erase the original second operand, move the head to the
right of the output, and halt.

With enough effort, we could build up a full library of mathematical
operations.


Turing's Thesis and Algorithms
------------------------------

You now have some intuition for what can be accomplished by Turing
machines.
A Turing machine can act as a language acceptor, or as a transducer
(meaning it can convert one string to another).
We have also shown some simple mathematical computations.
While it might be painful to write in “Turing machine code”, it is
certainly possible.
We have also seen how we can build up more complicated functionality.
Conceptually at least, we have discussed how to reuse machines to
make more advanced functionality easier to program.

How far can this go?
In principle, as far as any computer.
We will not present any further proof or argument here for this claim,
other than to say that at their heart, computer programs are built on
a few simple primitives like sequence, branches, and loops.
The rest is just convenient syntax.
These constructs can be implemented on Turing machines.

**Turing's Thesis**: Any computation that can be carried out by
mechanical means can be performed by some Turing machine.

From this, we have a useful working definition for the term
**algorithm**:
An algorithm to compute a function is a Turing machine program that
solves it.
Using this definition lets us reason formally about what problems
(functions) do or do not have algorithms.

Later we will discuss some functions that proveably do not have an
algorithm.
For convenience, we will not present the argument in terms of Turing
machines.
But this was the original purpose for developing the Turing machine
concept.
One of the more startling conclusions is that a Turing machine can be
implemented that takes a Turing machine representation as input and
simulates its execution on an input string!


Turing Machine Extensions
-------------------------

.. inlineav:: TMExtension ss
   :links: DataStructures/FLA/FLA.css AV/PIFLA/TM/TMExtension.css
   :scripts: AV/PIFLA/TM/TMExtension.js
   :output: show
   :keyword: Turing Machines

